<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Dance of Death</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-dance-of-death" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Many words for few things!”</p>
				<p>“Death ends all; judgment comes to all.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<hr/>
			<p>[This work may be called a prose poem. It is impregnated with the spirit
 of romanticism, which at the time of writing had a temporary but powerful
 hold on the mind of Gustave Flaubert.]</p>
			<hr/>
			<h3>
 Death Speaks
 	</h3>
			<p>At night, in winter, when the snow-flakes fall slowly from heaven like
 great white tears, I raise my voice; its resonance thrills the cypress
 trees and makes them bud anew.</p>
			<p>I pause an instant in my swift course over earth; throw myself down among
 cold tombs; and, while dark-plumaged birds rise suddenly in terror from my
 side, while the dead slumber peacefully, while cypress branches droop low
 o’er my head, while all around me weeps or lies in deep repose, my burning
 eyes rest on the great white clouds, gigantic winding-sheets, unrolling
 their slow length across the face of heaven.</p>
			<p>How many nights, and years, and ages have I journeyed thus! A witness of
 the universal birth and of a like decay; Innumerable are the generations I
 have garnered with my scythe. Like God, I am eternal! The nurse of Earth,
 I cradle it each night upon a bed both soft and warm. The same recurring
 feasts; the same unending toil! Each morning I depart, each evening I
 return, bearing within my mantle’s ample folds all that my scythe has
 gathered. And then I scatter them to the four winds of Heaven!</p>
			<p>When the high billows run, when the heavens weep, and shrieking winds lash
 ocean into madness, then in the turmoil and the tumult do I fling myself
 upon the surging waves, and lo! the tempest softly cradles me, as in her
 hammock sways a queen. The foaming waters cool my weary feet, burning from
 bathing in the falling tears of countless generations that have clung to
 them in vain endeavour to arrest my steps.</p>
			<p>Then, when the storm has ceased, after its roar has calmed me like a
 lullaby, I bow my head: the hurricane, raging in fury but a moment earlier
 dies instantly. No longer does it live, but neither do the men, the ships,
 the navies that lately sailed upon the bosom of the waters.</p>
			<p>‘Mid all that I have seen and known⁠—peoples and thrones, loves,
 glories, sorrows, virtues⁠—what have I ever loved? Nothing⁠—except
 the mantling shroud that covers me!</p>
			<p>My horse! ah, yes! my horse! I love thee too! How thou rushest o’er the
 world! thy hoofs of steel resounding on the heads bruised by thy speeding
 feet. Thy tail is straight and crisp, thine eyes dart flames, the mane
 upon thy neck flies in the wind, as on we dash upon our maddened course.
 Never art thou weary! Never do we rest! Never do we sleep! Thy neighing
 portends war; thy smoking nostrils spread a pestilence that, mist-like,
 hovers over earth. Where’er my arrows fly, thou overturnest pyramids and
 empires, trampling crowns beneath thy hoofs; All men respect thee; nay,
 adore thee! To invoke thy favour, popes offer thee their triple crowns,
 and kings their sceptres; peoples, their secret sorrows; poets, their
 renown. All cringe and kneel before thee, yet thou rushest on over their
 prostrate forms.</p>
			<p>Ah, noble steed! Sole gift from heaven! Thy tendons are of iron, thy head
 is of bronze. Thou canst pursue thy course for centuries as swiftly as if
 borne up by eagle’s wings; and when, once in a thousand years, resistless
 hunger comes, thy food is human flesh, thy drink, men’s tears. My steed! I
 love thee as Pale Death alone can love!</p>
			<p>Ah! I have lived so long! How many things I know! How many mysteries of
 the universe are shut within my breast!</p>
			<p>Sometimes, after I have hurled a myriad of darts, and, after coursing o’er
 the world on my pale horse, have gathered many lives, a weariness assails
 me, and I long to rest.</p>
			<p>But on my work must go; my path I must pursue; it leads through infinite
 space and all the worlds. I sweep away men’s plans together with their
 triumphs, their loves together with their crimes, their very all.</p>
			<p>I rend my winding-sheet; a frightful craving tortures me incessantly, as
 if some serpent stung continually within.</p>
			<p>I throw a backward glance, and see the smoke of fiery ruins left behind;
 the darkness of the night; the agony of the world. I see the graves that
 are the work of these, my hands; I see the background of the past⁠—’tis
 nothingness! My weary body, heavy head, and tired feet, sink, seeking
 rest. My eyes turn towards a glowing horizon, boundless, immense, seeming
 to grow increasingly in height and depth. I shall devour it, as I have
 devoured all else.</p>
			<p>When, O God! shall I sleep in my turn? When wilt Thou cease creating? When
 may I, digging my own grave, stretch myself out within my tomb, and,
 swinging thus upon the world, list the last breath, the death-gasp, of
 expiring nature?</p>
			<p>When that time comes, away my darts and shroud I’ll hurl. Then shall I
 free my horse, and he shall graze upon the grass that grows upon the
 Pyramids, sleep in the palaces of emperors, drink the last drop of water
 from the sea, and snuff the odour of the last slow drop of blood! By day,
 by night, through the countless ages, he shall roam through fields eternal
 as the fancy takes him; shall leap with one great bound from Atlas to the
 Himalayas; shall course, in his insolent pride, from heaven to earth;
 disport himself by caracoling in the dust of crumbled empires; shall speed
 across the beds of dried-up oceans; shall bound o’er ruins of enormous
 cities; inhale the void with swelling chest, and roll and stretch at ease.</p>
			<p>Then haply, faithful one, weary as I, thou finally shalt seek some
 precipice from which to cast thyself; shalt halt, panting before the
 mysterious ocean of infinity; and then, with foaming mouth, dilated
 nostrils, and extended neck turned towards the horizon, thou shalt, as I,
 pray for eternal sleep; for repose for thy fiery feet; for a bed of green
 leaves, whereon reclining thou canst close thy burning eyes forever.
 There, waiting motionless upon the brink, thou shalt desire a power
 stronger than thyself to kill thee at a single blow⁠—shalt pray for
 union with the dying storm, the faded flower, the shrunken corpse. Thou
 shalt seek sleep, because eternal life is torture, and the tomb is peace.</p>
			<p>Why are we here? What hurricane has hurled us into this abyss? What
 tempest soon shall bear us away towards the forgotten planets whence we
 came?</p>
			<p>Till then, my glorious steed, thou shalt run thy course; thou mayst please
 thine ear with the crunching of the heads crushed under thy feet. Thy
 course is long, but courage! Long time hast thou carried me: but longer
 time still must elapse, and yet we shall not age.</p>
			<p>Stars may be quenched, the mountains crumble, the earth finally wear away
 its diamond axis; but we two, we alone are immortal, for the impalpable
 lives forever!</p>
			<p>But to-day them canst lie at my feet, and polish thy teeth against the
 moss-grown tombs, for Satan has abandoned me, and a power unknown compels
 me to obey his will. Lo! the dead seek to rise from their graves.</p>
			<p>Satan, I love thee! Thou alone canst comprehend my joys and my deliriums.
 But, more fortunate than I, thou wilt some day, when earth shall be no
 more, recline and sleep within the realms of space.</p>
			<p>But I, who have lived so long, have worked so ceaselessly, with only
 virtuous loves and solemn thoughts⁠—I must endure immortality. Man
 has his tomb, and glory its oblivion; the day dies into night but I⁠—!</p>
			<p>And I am doomed to lasting solitude upon my way, strewn with the bones of
 men and marked by ruins. Angels have fellow-angels; demons their
 companions of darkness; but I hear only sounds of a clanking scythe, my
 whistling arrows, and my speeding horse. Always the echo of the surging
 billows that sweep over and engulf mankind!</p>
			<h3>
 Satan.
 </h3>
			<p>Dost thou complain⁠—thou, the most fortunate creature under heaven?
 The only, splendid, great, unchangeable, eternal one⁠—like God, who
 is the only Being that equals thee! Dost thou repine, who some day in thy
 turn shalt disappear forever, after thou hast crushed the universe beneath
 thy horse’s feet?</p>
			<p>When God’s work of creating has ceased; when the heavens have disappeared
 and the stars are quenched; when spirits rise from their retreats and
 wander in the depths with sighs and groans; then, what unpicturable
 delight for thee! Then shalt thou sit on the eternal thrones of heaven and
 of hell⁠—shalt overthrow the planets, stars, and worlds⁠—shalt
 loose thy steed in fields of emeralds and diamonds⁠—shalt make his
 litter of the wings torn from the angels⁠—shalt cover him with the
 robe of righteousness! Thy saddle shall be broidered with the stars of the
 empyrean⁠—and then thou wilt destroy it! After thou hast annihilated
 everything⁠—when naught remains but empty space⁠—thy coffin
 shattered and thine arrows broken, then make thyself a crown of stone from
 heaven’s highest mount, and cast thyself into the abyss of oblivion. Thy
 fall may last a million aeons, but thou shalt die at last. Because the
 world must end; all, all must die⁠—except Satan! Immortal more than
 God! I live to bring chaos into other worlds!</p>
			<h3>
 Death.
 </h3>
			<p>But thou hast not, as I, this vista of eternal nothingness before thee;
 thou dost not suffer with this death-like cold, as I.</p>
			<h3>
 Satan.
 </h3>
			<p>Nay, but I quiver under fierce and unrelaxing hearts of molten lava, which
 burn the doomed and which e’en I cannot escape.</p>
			<p>For thou, at least, hast only to destroy. But I bring birth and I give
 life. I direct empires and govern the affairs of States and of hearts.</p>
			<p>I must be everywhere. The precious metals flow, the diamonds glitter, and
 men’s names resound at my command. I whisper in the ears of women, of
 poets, and of statesmen, words of love, of glory, of ambition. With
 Messalina and Nero, at Paris and at Babylon, within the self-same moment
 do I dwell. Let a new island be discovered, I fly to it ere man can set
 foot there; though it be but a rock encircled by the sea, I am there in
 advance of men who will dispute for its possession. I lounge, at the same
 instant, on a courtesan’s couch and on the perfumed beds of emperors.
 Hatred and envy, pride and wrath, pour from my lips in simultaneous
 utterance. By night and day I work. While men ate burning Christians, I
 luxuriate voluptuously in baths perfumed with roses; I race in chariots;
 yield to deep despair; or boast aloud in pride.</p>
			<p>At times I have believed that I embodied the whole world, and all that I
 have seen took place, in verity, within my being.</p>
			<p>Sometimes I weary, lose my reason, and indulge in such mad follies that
 the most worthless of my minions ridicule me while they pity me.</p>
			<p>No creature cares for me; nowhere am I loved⁠—neither in heaven, of
 which I am a son, nor yet in hell, where I am lord, nor upon earth, where
 men deem me a god. Naught do I see but paroxysms of rage, rivers of blood,
 or maddened frenzy. Ne’er shall my eyelids close in slumber, never my
 spirit find repose, whilst thou, at least, canst rest thy head upon the
 cool, green freshness of the grave. Yea, I must ever dwell amid the glare
 of palaces, must listen to the curses of the starving, or inhale the
 stench of crimes that cry aloud to heaven.</p>
			<p>God, whom I hate, has punished me indeed! But my soul is greater even than
 His wrath; in one deep sigh I could the whole world draw into my breast,
 where it would burn eternally, even as I.</p>
			<p>When, Lord, shall thy great trumpet sound? Then a great harmony shall
 hover over sea and hill. Ah! would that I could suffer with humanity;
 their cries and sobs should drown the sound of mine!</p>
			<p>[<i>Innumerable skeletons, riding in chariots, advance at a rapid pace,
 with cries of joy and triumph. They drag broken branches and crowns of
 laurel, from which the dried and yellow leaves fall continually in the
 wind and the dust.</i>]</p>
			<p>Lo, a triumphal throng from Rome, the Eternal City! Her Coliseum and her
 Capitol are now two grains of sands that served once as a pedestal; but
 Death has swung his scythe: the monuments have fallen. Behold! At their
 head comes Nero, pride of my heart, the greatest poet earth has known!</p>
			<p>[<i>Nero advances in a chariot drawn by twelve skeleton horses. With the
 sceptre in his hand, he strikes the bony backs of his steeds. He stands
 erect, his shroud flapping behind him in billowy folds. He turns, as if
 upon a racecourse; his eyes are flaming and he cries loudly:</i>]</p>
			<h3>
 Nero.
 </h3>
			<p>Quick! Quick! And faster still, until your feet dash fire from the flinty
 stones and your nostrils fleck your breasts with foam. What! do not the
 wheels smoke yet? Hear ye the fanfares, whose sound reached even to Ostia;
 the clapping of the hands, the cries of joy? See how the populace shower
 saffron on my head! See how my pathway is already damp with sprayed
 perfume! My chariot whirls on; the pace is swifter than the wind as I
 shake the golden reins! Faster and faster! The dust clouds rise; my mantle
 floats upon the breeze, which in my ears sings “Triumph! triumph!” Faster
 and faster! Hearken to the shouts of joy, list to the stamping feet and
 the plaudits of the multitude. Jupiter himself looks down on us from
 heaven. Faster! yea, faster still!</p>
			<p>[<i>Nero’s chariot now seems to be drawn by demons: a black cloud of dust
 and smoke envelops him; in his erratic course he crashes into tombs, and
 the re-awakened corpses are crushed under the wheels of the chariot, which
 now turns, comes forward, and stops.</i>]</p>
			<h3>
 Nero.
 </h3>
			<p>Now, let six hundred of my women dance the Grecian Dances silently before
 me, the while I lave myself with roses in a bath of porphyry. Then let
 them circle me, with interlacing arms, that I may see on all sides
 alabaster forms in graceful evolution, swaying like tall reeds bending
 over an amorous pool.</p>
			<p>And I will give the empire and the sea, the Senate, the Olympus, the
 Capitol, to her who shall embrace me the most ardently; to her whose heart
 shall throb beneath my own; to her who shall enmesh me in her flowing
 hair, smile on me sweetest, and enfold me in the warmest clasp; to her who
 soothing me with songs of love shall waken me to joy and heights of
 rapture! Rome shall be still this night; no barque shall cleave the waters
 of the Tiber, since ’tis my wish to see the mirrored moon on its
 untroubled face and hear the voice of woman floating over it. Let perfumed
 breezes pass through all my draperies! Ah, I would die, voluptuously
 intoxicated.</p>
			<p>Then, while I eat of some rare meat, that only I may taste, let some one
 sing, while damsels, lightly draped, serve me from plates of gold and
 watch my rest. One slave shall cut her sister’s throat, because it is my
 pleasure⁠—a favourite with the gods⁠—to mingle the perfume of
 blood with that of food, and cries of victims soothe my nerves.</p>
			<p>This night I shall burn Rome. The flames shall light up heaven, and Tiber
 shall roll in waves of fire!</p>
			<p>Then, I shall build of aloes wood a stage to float upon the Italian sea,
 and the Roman populace shall throng thereto chanting my praise. Its
 draperies shall be of purple, and on it I shall have a bed of eagles’
 plumage. There I shall sit, and at my side shall be the loveliest woman in
 the empire, while all the universe applauds the achievements of a god! And
 though the tempest roar round me, its rage shall be extinguished ’neath my
 feet, and sounds of music shall o’ercome the clamor of the waves!</p>
			<p>What didst thou say? Vindex revolts, my legions fly, my women flee in
 terror? Silence and tears alone remain, and I hear naught but the rolling
 of thunder. Must I die, now?</p>
			<h3>
 Death.
 </h3>
			<p>Instantly!</p>
			<h3>
 Nero.
 </h3>
			<p>Must I give up my days of feasting and delight, my spectacles, my
 triumphs, my chariots and the applause of multitudes?</p>
			<h3>
 Death.
 </h3>
			<p>All! All!</p>
			<h3>
 Satan.
 </h3>
			<p>Haste, Master of the World! One comes⁠—One who will put thee to the
 sword. An emperor knows how to die!</p>
			<h3>
 Nero.
 </h3>
			<p>Die! I have scarce begun to live! Oh, what great deeds I should accomplish⁠—deeds
 that should make Olympus tremble! I would fill up the bed of hoary ocean
 and speed across it in a triumphal car. I would still live⁠—would see
 the sun once more, the Tiber, the Campagna, the Circus on the golden
 sands. Ah! let me live!</p>
			<h3>
 Death.
 </h3>
			<p>I will give thee a mantle for the tomb, and an eternal bed that shall be
 softer and more peaceful than the Imperial couch.</p>
			<h3>
 Nero.
 </h3>
			<p>Yet, I am loth to die.</p>
			<h3>
 Death.
 </h3>
			<p>Die, then!</p>
			<p>[<i>He gathers up the shroud, lying beside him on the ground, and bears
 away Nero⁠—wrapped in its folds.</i>]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
